
```sql
-- 0. Drop table INSTRUCTOR in case it already exists
drop table INSTRUCTOR
;
--1. Create table INSTRUCTOR
CREATE TABLE INSTRUCTOR
  (ins_id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY NOT NULL, 
   lastname VARCHAR(15) NOT NULL, 
   firstname VARCHAR(15) NOT NULL, 
   city VARCHAR(15), 
   country CHAR(2)
  )
;
--2A. Insert single row for Rav Ahuja
INSERT INTO INSTRUCTOR
  (ins_id, lastname, firstname, city, country)
  VALUES 
  (1, 'Ahuja', 'Rav', 'Toronto', 'CA')
;
--2B. Insert the two rows for Raul and Hima
INSERT INTO INSTRUCTOR
  VALUES
  (2, 'Chong', 'Raul', 'Toronto', 'CA'),
  (3, 'Vasudevan', 'Hima', 'Chicago', 'US')
;
--3. Select all rows in the table
SELECT * FROM INSTRUCTOR
;
--3b. Select firstname, lastname and country where city is Toronto
SELECT firstname, lastname, country from INSTRUCTOR where city='Toronto'
;
--4. Change the city for Rav to Markham
UPDATE INSTRUCTOR SET city='Markham' where ins_id=1
;
--5. Delete the row for Raul Chong
DELETE FROM INSTRUCTOR where ins_id=2
;
--5b. Retrieve all rows from the table
SELECT * FROM INSTRUCTOR 
;
```


# relationship database concept

data model:

entity-relationship model

as a tool to design relationship databases

building blocks: entities and attributes

Data is organized in tables with entity relationships   

types of relationships

 building blocks of a relationship

 - entity sets

 - relationship sets

 - crows foot notation

Entities can have one-to-one or many-to-many relationships with other entities
 
 one-to-one
 
 one-to-many
 
 many-to-many

 mapping entities to tables

 ER diagram: basic foundation for design 

 ERD to Table
 
 Entities in an ERD are mapped to tables in a relational database
 
 attributes get translated into columns


relational model: based on the concept of relation

building blocks:

- relation

- sets

set: unordered + no duplicate

relational database

a set of relations

relation = math term for table

made up of 2 parts

- relational schema: name of a relation, name and type of each column

The following name and attributes indicates the Relational Schema of a table:

JOE.AUTHOR(ID integer, FIRSTNAME varchar, LASTNAME varchar)

- relational instance: a table made up of attributes or columns

column = attributes = field

row = tuple

degree = the number of attributes in a relation

cardinality = the number of tuples

# additional

Create Schema
A SQL schema is identified by a schema name, and includes a authorization identifier to indicate the user or account who owns the schema. Schema elements include tables, constraints, views, domains and other constructs that describe the schema.

A schema is created using the CREATE SCHEMA statement. For example, we can create a schema called LIBRARY for this course:

CREATE SCHEMA LIBRARY AUTHORIZATION ‘Robert’

The data types used can be: numeric, character-string, bit-string, Boolean, DATE, timestamp, etc.

CREATE TABLE Statement
The CREATE TABLE statement includes these clauses:

· DEFAULT

· CHECK

Use the DEFAULT clause in the CREATE TABLE statement to specify the default value for the database server to insert into a column when no explicit value for the column is specified.

Use the CHECK clause to designate conditions that must be met before data can be assigned to a column during an INSERT or UPDATE statement.

During an insert or update, if the check constraint of a row evaluates to false, the database server returns an error. The database server does not return an error if a row evaluates to NULL for a check constraint. In some cases, you might want to use both a check constraint and a NOT NULL constraint.

SELECT Statement
The basic structure of the SELECT statement is formed from three clauses: SELECT, FROM and WHERE.

<attribute list> is a list of attribute names whose values are to be retrieved by the query

<table list> is a list of the relation names required to process the query

<condition> is a conditional(Boolean) expression that identifies the tuples to be retrieved by the query

In situations where you might want to use multiple IF-THEN-ELSE statements, you can often use a single SELECT statement instead. The SELECT statement allows a CLIST to select actions from a list of possible actions. An action consists of one or more statements or commands. The SELECT statement has the following syntax, ending with the END statement. You can use the SELECT statement with or without the initial test expression.

SELECT [test expression]

WHEN [expression1]

...

(action)

...

WHEN [expression2]

WHEN [expression3]

...

[OTHERWISE]

...

(action)

...

END
