
create table TABLENAME (
    COLUMN1 datatype,
    COLUMN2 datatype,
    COLUMN3 datatype,
        ...
    ) ;

 create table COUNTRY (
    ID int NOT NULL,
    CCODE char(2),
    NAME varchar(60),
    PRIMARY KEY (ID)
    );   



# string patterns, ranges, sorting and grouping

* string patterns

```sql
SELECT firstname FROM author
WHERE firstname LIKE 'R%' --start with letter R
```

* range

```sql
SELECT title, pages FROM book
WHERE pages BETWEEN 290 AND 300
```

* set

```sql
SELECT firstname
FROM author
WHERE country IN ('AU','BR')
```

* sort

```sql
SELECT title 
FROM book
ORDER BY title -- ASC
```

or use column seq number

```sql
SELECT t
FROM book
ORDER BY 2
```

* grouping result sets

* eliminate duplicates: distinct

Whereas the WHERE clause is used to restrict the entire result set, the HAVING clause is used only with the GROUP BY clause

```sql
SELECT DISTINCT(ctry) FROM author

SELECT  ctry, COUNT(ctry) as cnt
FROM author
GROUP BY ctry
HAVING count(ctry) > 4 --only those ctries are selected
```



Query 5E: In Query 5D limit the result to departments with fewer than 4 employees.

[Hint: Use HAVING after the GROUP BY, and use the count() function in the HAVING clause instead of the column label.

Note: WHERE clause is used for filtering the entire result set whereas the HAVING clause is used for filtering the result of the grouping]


```sql
select DEP_ID, COUNT(*) AS "NUM_EMPLOYEES", AVG(SALARY) AS "AVG_SALARY"
from EMPLOYEES
group by DEP_ID
having count(*) < 4
order by AVG_SALARY;
--5E alternative: if you want to use the label
select DEP_ID, NUM_EMPLOYEES, AVG_SALARY from
  ( select DEP_ID, COUNT(*) AS NUM_EMPLOYEES, AVG(SALARY) AS AVG_SALARY from EMPLOYEES group by DEP_ID)
  where NUM_EMPLOYEES < 4
order by AVG_SALARY;
```


# built-in functions

reduce amount of data needs to be retrieved

can speed up data processing

## AGGREGATE: column function

input: collection of values (e.g. entire column)

output: single value

examples: SUM(), MIN(), MAX(), AVG()

SUM(): add up all values in a column

can ado math between columns

SELECT AVG(price/cnt)

* SCALAR function: perform ops on every input value

e.g. ROUND(), LENGTH(), UCASE, LCASE

# date, time

DAY()

MONTH()

SELECT (saledate + 3 DAYS)

# subquery: a query inside another

cannot evaluate aggregate functions like AVG() in the WHERE clause

use a sub-select expression

```sql
select * 
FROM e
where salary < (select avg(salary) from employees)
```

in list of columns

```sql
select eid, salary,
	(select avg(salary) from e
	as avg)
FROM e
```

in from clause

```sql
SELECT * FROM 
	(SELECT eid, 
	FROM e) as e4all
```	


multiple tables

1. sub-queries

```sql
SELECT * FROM e
	WHERE depid IN
	(SELECT d from departments
		WHERE loc ='L0002')
```



2. full join

every row in first table joined with 2nd table

```sql
SELECT * FROM e, d
WHERE e.id = d.id
```

3. join operators

## relational model constraints


A Foreign Key is a column (or a set of columns) referring to a primary key of another table.

parent table: a table containing a primary key that is related to >= 1 foreign key

dependent table: a table containing >= 1 foreign keys

constriants

- entity integerity

primary key: cannot have null

Remember, a primary key uniquely identifies each row in a table. If multiple rows in a table had NULL values for its Primary Key, we would not know which NULL value identifies which row (tuple) in a table, and you could end up with duplicate rows in a table.

- referential integrity


The Referential Integrity Constraint ensures the validity of the data using a combination of Primary Keys and Foreign Keys.


- semantic integrity: correctness

- domain

- null

- check


Primary Keys

If a relation schema has more than one key, then each key is called a candidate key. One of the candidate keys is designated as the primary key, and the others are called secondary keys.

In a practical relational database, each relation schema must have a primary key.

Rules for primary keys:

The value of the Primary Key must be unique for each instance of the entity.

There can be no missing values (i.e. Not Null) for Primary Keys. If the Primary Key is composed of multiple attributes, each of those attributes must have a value for each instance.

The Primary Key is immutable, that is, once created the value of the Primary Key cannot be changed.

If the Primary Key consists of multiple attributes, none of these values can be updated.

Semantic Integrity
Semantic integrity ensures that data entered into a row reflects an allowable value for that row. The value must be within the domain, or allowable set of values, for that column. For example, the quantity column of the items table permits only numbers. If a value outside the domain can be entered into a column, the semantic integrity of the data is violated.

Semantic Constraints
Semantic Constraints are constraints that cannot be directly expressed in the schemas of the data model. Semantic constraints are also called application-based rules or business rules. They are additional rules specified by users or database administrators. For example, a class can have a maximum of 30 students; salary of an employee cannot exceed the salary of the employee’s manager.

Domain constraints specify that within a tuple the value of each attribute must be an element from the domain of that attribute. The data types associated with the domains include:

Integers (short integer, integer, long integer)

Real numbers (float and double precision float)

Characters

Booleans

Fixed-length strings and variable length strings

Date, time, timestamp

Money

Other special data types

Other possible domain values may be a sub-range of values from a data type or as an enumerated data type in which values are explicitly listed

